---
layout: overview
title: Commercialization
body_class: body-green
next: difference
---

# Commercialization

Hosting a node costs money. Disk space, CPU power, network traffic cost
money. You will pay for them one way or another.

You can install your own server, administer it by yourself and pay for
electricity and network traffic. You can rent a VPS, a virtual host (one
node instance may handle several domains) or host in a cloud and pay for
the rent. Like with regular web hosting, may be costly at the beginning
(but not too expensive anyway), but will be cheaper later, at larger
scale, as software and hardware improves. Better software also
contributes to better hardware utilization.

Moera does not prescribe you how you should get your node. There may
exist many service providers and some of them may give you a node for
free. This just means that the provider pays the bills and you pay to
the provider by giving access to your private data, or by your time and
attention when viewing ads, or by using other services which include
price of the "free" hosting into their price. It's your choice - choose 
what is better to you, just take into account, that "there ain't no such
thing as a free lunch". If something is marketed as free, it just means
you don't know how, when, and how much you will pay.

Also note that advertising-based services are profitable only at large
scale and often closed if they have not enough users. You can remember
many Google services that were closed as unattractive, while having
millions of users worldwide. A service that takes a fee may be
profitable much longer and some of them exist from the early days of
Internet. Payment protects you from unexpected discontinuation of the
service.

Moera also allows you to profit from your node. Three components: single
sign on, subscriptions, and full freedom in giving access to you content
to whoever you want make possible to take a payment for subscription or
to invent any other business model. And, in contrast to centralized
social networks, you will not be blocked or demonetized due to conflict
with the social network business model.
 
There is no "business model of Moera". Moera is just a family of
protocols and software that implements them. Any person or organization
participating in the network in any role may take any business approach
and profit from interconnectivity and social value that Moera provides.
