---
layout: overview
title: Centralized vs. Decentralized
nav: index
body_class: body-green
---

# Centralized vs. Decentralized

The World Wide Web was designed with decentralization in mind. One of
the core ideas was that every user, organization, project should have
their own site or page located anywhere in the Internet and linked with
other pages using hyperlinks. The term *home page* came to us from these
ancient times. But the period when users created their own home pages
and filled them with their own content was very short. Soon, they began
to use centralized services for this purpose: forums, portals, blogging
platforms and so on. Comparing to the handcrafted home pages, the
platforms have many advantages.

**Ease of use.** No more tricky HTML/CSS formatting and server
programming. You enter the text - and it becomes published, in a second.
You can concentrate on the content and leave programming to programmers.

**Uniform design.** No more wild colors, non-readable text and confusing
navigation. Simple and straightforward, the design allows to quickly
reach the information you need.

**Free of charge.** You don't need to pay for the service. Just register
and start using it. The platform makes profit from selling advertising
and optional services.

**Feedback.** Comments, likes, reposts, polls, private messages etc.

**Single sign on.** You don't need to register on every personal page to
leave a comment - your username and password need to be entered once and
used everywhere. And nowadays you can even login to a third-party site
with your Google/Facebook/Twitter credentials.

**Find friends.** Locate them by their username, real name, phone number
etc.

**Link friends.** Tag them on photos and mention in comments.

**Friend feed.** You can subscribe to your friends' updates and see
everything they publish on one page.

**Notifications.** Never miss a comment or a birthday.

**Groups, events, tags.** Everything related to a single topic in one
place. Create local communities with rules and moderation. Invite your
friends to a barbecue.

**Security.** Give view and editing rights for your posts for different
groups of users. Block spam and unpleasant persons.

But everything has a price. And placing all your content (very valuable
for you) on a centralized platform has many drawbacks that are inherent
to centralized systems.

**Censorship.** Even if the platform wants to preserve the freedom of
speech, it is vulnerable to pressure from governments, organized groups
of users (that threaten to leave the platform), advertisers and its own
employees. The platforms begins to provide rules of conduct and
censorship that seems reasonable at the beginning, but quckly goes out
of control. Theoretical ability to filter the content becomes
responsibility and refusal is punished. The worst is that it is
practically impossible to censor tens of millions of active users. It
requires hiring of the large number of human censors or using the
"intellectual" software with a lot of false positives. This leads to
banning innocent people, fade of humour and sarcasm, manifestation of
political bias and mob rule. The platform becomes boring and
frustrating.

**End of life.** The owner may decide to close the platform at any
moment, if it does not produce enough revenue. And often there are no
alternatives in the market to migrate to. Even if the service is very
important to you, you will not be able to prolong its life, even by with
payment.

**Vendor lock-in.** There is no easy way to migrate your data from the
platform, if it does not fit your needs, even if alternatives are
available.

**Limited access.** Your data is a profitable resource for the platform,
it does not want to share it with anybody else. Display of your data in
other websites and applications is explicitly prohibited by platform's
rules meaning you cannot create an alternative viewer that better suits
your needs. Automated access to your data via APIs is very limited. You
cannot get a link to an image from your gallery and insert it into your
blog - these links are temporary. Your public content is not indexed by
search engines and not viewable by anybody who isn't logged in. If you
already have a website, you cannot make your content accessible from
within the platform (i.e. by implementing some API) - you need to copy
all your data to the platform and synchronize all updates. You cannot
merge comments at the platform with comments outside it.

**Lack of features.**

**Annoying ads.**

**No control what to read.**

**No control how to read.**

**No privacy.**